Word2Vec
1


Word2Vec is one of the emerging and prominent word embedding technique.



Proposed by Mikolov et al. in 2013.



Word2vec is a combination of models used to represent distributed
representations of words in a corpus C.



Word2Vec (W2V) is an algorithm that accepts text corpus as an input and
outputs a vector representation for each word, as shown in the diagram below:

There are two flavors of this algorithm
2



CBOW
it uses each of these contexts to predict the current word w, in that case
the method is called “Continuous Bag Of Words” (CBOW).
 To limit the number of words in each context, a parameter called “window
size” is used.




Skip-Gram


Given a set of sentences (also called corpus) the model loops on the
words of each sentence and either tries to use the current word w in
order to predict its neighbors (i.e., its context).

3

Vector Representation
4



The vectors we use to represent words are called neural word embeddings,
and representations are strange.



One thing describes another, even though those two things are radically
different.



Word2vec “vectorizes” about words, and by doing so it makes natural
language computer-readable — we can start to perform powerful
mathematical operations on words to detect their similarities.

Word2vec is similar to an autoencoder
5



So, a neural word embedding represents a word with numbers.



It’s a simple, yet unlikely, translation.



Word2vec is similar to an autoencoder, encoding each word in a vector, but
rather than training against the input words through reconstruction, as a
restricted Boltzmann machine does, word2vec trains words against other
words that neighbor them in the input corpus.

It does so in one of two ways
6



either using context to predict a target word (a method known as continuous
bag of words, or CBOW)



or using a word to predict a target context, which is called skip-gram. We
use the latter method because it produces more accurate results on large
datasets.

In this lecture, we are going to focus on Skip-Gram model which in contrast to CBOW consider center
word as input as depicted in figure above and predict context words.
7

The components of the vector are adjusted
8



When the feature vector assigned to a word cannot be used to accurately
predict that word’s context, the components of the vector are adjusted.



Each word’s context in the corpus is the teacher sending error signals back
to adjust the feature vector.



The vectors of words judged similar by their context are nudged closer
together by adjusting the numbers in the vector.

Model overview
9


We have to feed some strange neural network with some pairs of words but we
can’t just do that using as inputs the actual characters, we have to find some
way to represent these words mathematically so that the network can process
them.



One way to do this is to create a vocabulary of all the words in our text and
then to encode our word as a vector of the same dimensions of our vocabulary.



Each dimension can be thought as a word in our vocabulary.



So, we will have a vector with all zeros and a 1 which represents the
corresponding word in the vocabulary.



This encoding technique is called one-hot encoding.

Example:
10

Considering our example, if we have a vocabulary made out of the words “the”,
“quick”, “brown”, “fox”, “jumps”, “over”, “the” “lazy”, “dog”, the word “brown” is
represented by this vector: [ 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0 ,0 ,0 ,0 ].
 The Skip-gram model takes in a corpus of text and creates a hot-vector for
each word.


Hot Vector
11

A hot vector is a vector representation of a word where the vector is the size
of the vocabulary (total unique words).
 All dimensions are set to 0 except the dimension representing the word that
is used as an input at that point in time.
 Here is an example of a hot vector:




The above input is given to a neural network with a single hidden layer.

Cont’d
12



We’re going to represent an input word like “ants” as a one-hot vector.



This vector will have 10,000 components (one for every word in our
vocabulary) and we’ll place a “1” in the position corresponding to the word
“ants”, and 0s in all of the other positions.



The output of the network is a single vector (also with 10,000 components)
containing, for every word in our vocabulary, the probability that a randomly
selected nearby word is that vocabulary word.

In word2vec, a distributed representation of a word is used
13



Take a vector with several hundred dimensions (say 1000).



Each word is represented by a distribution of weights across those
elements.



So instead of a one-to-one mapping between an element in the vector and a
word, the representation of a word is spread across all the elements in the
vector, and each element in the vector contributes to the definition of many
words.

14

We can also use the vectors as inputs to a neural network
15



Since our input vectors are one-hot, multiplying an input vector by the
weight matrix W1 amounts to simply selecting a row from W1.

16

Here’s the architecture of our neural network
17

18

Hidden layer weight matrix
19


So, the end goal of all of this is really just to learn this hidden layer weight
matrix — the output layer we’ll just toss when we’re done!



The 1 x 300 word vector for “ants” then gets fed to the output layer.



The output layer is a Softmax Regression classifier.



Specifically, each output neuron has a weight vector which it multiplies against
the word vector from the hidden layer, then it applies the function exp(x) to the
result.



Finally, in order to get the outputs to sum up to 1, we divide this result by the
sum of the results from all 10,000 output nodes.

20

21

22

illustration of calculating the output of the output neuron for the word ‘car’
23

Each dimension of the input
24

Each dimension of the input passes through each node of the hidden layer.
 The dimension is multiplied by the weight leading it to the hidden layer.
 Because the input is a hot vector, only one of the input nodes will have a
non-zero value (namely the value of 1).
 This means that for a word only the weights associated with the input node
with value 1 will be activated, as shown in the image in the previous slide.
 As the input in this case is a hot vector, only one of the input nodes will have
a non-zero value.
 This means that only the weights connected to that input node will be
activated in the hidden nodes.


Example:
25


An example of the weights that will be considered is depicted below for the
second word in the vocabulary:



The vector representation of the second word in the vocabulary (shown in the
neural network before) will look as follows, once activated in the hidden layer:

26

27

28

The error is then adjusted at each layer & sent back further using
Backpropagation
29

Word2vec uses a single hidden layer
30

Word2vec uses a single hidden layer, fully connected neural network,
 The neurons in the hidden layer are all linear neurons.
 The input layer is set to have as many neurons as there are words in the
vocabulary for training.
 The hidden layer size is set to the dimensionality of the resulting word vectors.
 The size of the output layer is same as the input layer.
 Thus, if the vocabulary for learning word vectors consists of V words and N to be
the dimension of word vectors, the input to hidden layer connections can be
represented by matrix WI of size VxN with each row representing a vocabulary
word.
 In same way, the connections from hidden layer to output layer can be described
by matrix WO of size NxV.
 In this case, each column of WO matrix represents a word from the given
vocabulary.


31

Example:
32



Let suppose we have a training corpus having the following sentences:
“the dog saw a cat”, “the dog chased the cat”, “the cat climbed a tree”

The corpus vocabulary has eight words.
 Once ordered alphabetically, each word can be referenced by its index.
 For this example, our neural network will have eight input neurons and eight
output neurons.
 Let us assume that we decide to use three neurons in the hidden layer.
 This means that WI and WO will be 8×3 and 3×8 matrices, respectively.
 Before training begins, these matrices are initialized to small random values
as is usual in neural network training.


For the illustration sake, let us assume WI and WO to
be initialized to the following values
33

Suppose we want the network to learn relationship
between the words “cat” and “climbed”
34

That is, the network should show a high probability for “climbed” when “cat” is
inputted to the network.
 In word embedding terminology, the word “cat” is referred as the context word and
the word “climbed” is referred as the target word.
 In this case, the input vector X will be [0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0]. Notice that only
the second component of the vector is 1.
 This is because the input word is “cat” which is holding number two position in
sorted list of corpus words.
 Given that the target word is “climbed”, the target vector will look like
[0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 ].
 With the input vector representing “cat”, the output at the hidden layer neurons can
be computed as:
Ht = XtWI = [-0.490796 -0.229903 0.065460]
 It should not surprise us that the vector H of hidden neuron outputs mimics the
weights of the second row of WI matrix because of 1-out-of-V representation.
 So the function of the input to hidden layer connections is basically to copy the
input word vector to hidden layer.


The activation vector for output layer neurons
35

Carrying out similar manipulations for hidden to output layer, the activation vector
for output layer neurons can be written as
HtWO = [0.100934 -0.309331 -0.122361 -0.151399 0.143463 -0.051262 -0.079686
0.112928]
 Since, the goal is produce probabilities for words in the output layer, Pr(wordk|
wordcontext) for k = 1, V
to reflect their next word relationship with the context word at input, we need the
sum of neuron outputs in the output layer to add to one.
 Word2vec achieves this by converting activation values of output layer neurons to
probabilities using the softmax function.
 Thus, the output of the k-th neuron is computed by the following expression where
activation(n) represents the activation value of the n-th output layer neuron:


Probabilities
36

Thus, the probabilities for eight words in the corpus are:
0.143073 0.094925 0.114441 0.111166 0.149289 0.122874 0.119431 0.144800
 The probability in bold is for the chosen target word “climbed”.
 Given the target vector [0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 ]t, the error vector for the output
layer is easily computed by subtracting the probability vector from the target
vector.
 Once the error is known, the weights in the matrices WO and WI can be
updated using backpropagation.
 Thus, the training can proceed by presenting different context-target words
pair from the corpus.
 This is how Word2vec learns relationships between words and in the
process develops vector representations for words in the corpus.


37

Human meaning
38


To our knowledge, there are no “human meaning” specifically to each of the
numbers in these representations.



One number is not representing if the word is a verb or not, an adjective or not.



It’s just the weights that you change to solve your optimization problem to learn
the representation of your words.

39

Hot Format
40



The first matrix represents the input vector in one hot format.



The second matrix represents the synaptic weights from the input layer
neurons to the hidden layer neurons.



Especially notice the left top corner where the Input Layer matrix is
multiplied with the Weight matrix.



Now look at the top right. This matrix multiplication InputLayer dot-producted
with Weights Transpose is just a handy way to represent the neural network
at the top right.

Weight Matrix
41



The first part, [0 0 0 1 0 … 0] represents the input word as a one hot vector
and the other matrix represents the weight for the connection of each of the
input layer neurons to the hidden layer neurons.



As Word2Vec trains, it backpropagates (using gradient descent) into these
weights and changes them to give better representations of words as
vectors.



Once training is accomplished, you use only this weight matrix, take
[0 0 1 0 0 … 0]
for say ‘dog’ and multiply it with the improved weight matrix to get the vector
representation of ‘dog’ in a dimension = no of hidden layer neurons.


In the diagram, the number of hidden layer neurons is 3.

42

Modification
43


We need few additional modifications to the basic skip-gram model which are
important for making it feasible to train.



Running gradient descent on a neural network that large is going to be slow.



And to make matters worse, you need a huge amount of training data to tune
that many weights and avoid over-fitting.



Millions of weights times billions of training samples means that training this
model is going to be a beast.



For that, authors have proposed two techniques called subsampling and
negative sampling in which insignificant words are removed and only a specific
sample of weights are updated.

44

Implementation details
45



Word2vec has been implemented in various languages but here we will
focus especially on Java i.e., DeepLearning4j, darks-learning, and python.



Various neural net algorithms have been implemented in DL4j, code is
available on GitHub.

To implement it in DL4j
46



To implement it in DL4j, we will go through few steps given as following:
 a) Word2Vec Setup
 b) Load data
 c) Tokenizing the Data
 d) Training the Model
 e) Evaluating the Model, Using Word2vec

a) Word2Vec Setup
47



Create a new project using Maven.



Then specify properties and dependencies in the POM.xml file in your
project’s root directory.

b) Load data
48


Now create and name a new class in Java.



After that, you’ll take the raw sentences in your .txt file, traverse them with your
iterator, and subject them to some sort of pre-processing, such as converting all
words to lowercase.

String filePath = new
ClassPathResource(“raw_sentences.txt”).getFile().getAbsolutePath();
log.info(“Load & Vectorize Sentences….”);
// Strip white space before and after for each line
SentenceIterator iter = new BasicLineIterator(filePath);

49

c) Tokenizing the Data
50



Word2vec needs to be fed words rather than whole sentences, so the next
step is to tokenize the data.



To tokenize a text is to break it up into its atomic units, creating a new token
each time you hit a white space, for example.

// Split on white spaces in the line to get words
TokenizerFactory t = new DefaultTokenizerFactory();
t.setTokenPreProcessor(new CommonPreprocessor());

d) Training the Model
51


Now that the data is ready, you can configure the Word2vec neural net and
feed in the tokens.

Configuration Parameters
52
•
•

•
•

•
•

•
•
•

batchSize is the amount of words you process at a time.
minWordFrequency is the minimum number of times a word must appear in the corpus.
Here, if it appears less than 5 times, it is not learned. Words must appear in multiple
contexts to learn useful features about them. In very large corpora, it’s reasonable to raise
the minimum.
useAdaGrad — Adagrad creates a different gradient for each feature. Here we are not
concerned with that.
layerSize specifies the number of features in the word vector. This is equal to the number
of dimensions in the featurespace. Words represented by 500 features become points in a
500-dimensional space.
learningRate is the step size for each update of the coefficients, as words are repositioned
in the feature space.
minLearningRate is the floor on the learning rate. Learning rate decays as the number of
words you train on decreases. If learning rate shrinks too much, the net’s learning is no
longer efficient. This keeps the coefficients moving.
iterate tells the net what batch of the dataset it’s training on.
tokenizer feeds it the words from the current batch.
vec.fit() tells the configured net to begin training.

e) Evaluating the Model, Using Word2vec
53



The next step is to evaluate the quality of your feature vectors.

54

55

