Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
1


    Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) is a technique that enhances
    language model generation by incorporating external knowledge.

   This is typically done by retrieving relevant information from a large corpus
    of documents and using that information to inform the generation process.
Challenge:
2


   Clients often have vast proprietary documents.
   Extracting specific information is like finding a needle in a haystack.
2. GPT4-Turbo Introduction:
3


   OpenAI’s GPT4-Turbo can process large documents.
3. Efficiency Issue:
4


   “Lost In The Middle” phenomenon hampers efficiency.
   Model forgets content in the middle of its contextual window.
4. Alternative Approach — RAG
5


   Create an index for each document paragraph.
   Swiftly identify pertinent paragraphs.
   Feed selected paragraphs into a Large Language Model (LLM) like GPT4.
5. Advantages
6


   Prevents information overload.
   Enhances result quality by providing only relevant paragraphs.
RAG Paper
7


   In a 2020 paper, Meta (then known as Facebook) came up with a
    framework called retrieval-augmented generation to give LLMs access to
    information beyond their training data. RAG allows LLMs to build on a
    specialized body of knowledge to answer questions in more accurate way.
          https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.11401v4

   “It’s the difference between an open-book and a closed-book exam,”
    Lastras said. “In a RAG system, you are asking the model to respond to a
    question by browsing through the content in a book, as opposed to trying to
    remember facts from memory.”
8


   As the name suggests, RAG has two phases: retrieval and content
    generation.
   In the retrieval phase, algorithms search for and retrieve snippets of
    information relevant to the user’s prompt or question.
      In an open-domain, consumer setting, those facts can come from
       indexed documents on the internet;
      in a closed-domain, enterprise setting, a narrower set of sources are
       typically used for added security and reliability.
   This assortment of external knowledge is appended to the user’s prompt
    and passed to the language model.
   In the generative phase, the LLM draws from the augmented prompt and its
    internal representation of its training data to synthesize an engaging answer
    tailored to the user in that instant.
      The answer can then be passed to a chatbot with links to its sources.
The Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) Pipeline
9


   With RAG, the LLM is able to leverage knowledge and information that is
    not necessarily in its weights by providing it access to external knowledge
    sources such as databases.

   It leverages a retriever to find relevant contexts to condition the LLM, in this
    way, RAG is able to augment the knowledge-base of an LLM with relevant
    documents.
The retriever here could be any of the following
depending on the need for semantic retrieval or not:
10


    Vector database:
      Typically, queries are embedded using models like BERT for generating dense
       vector embeddings.
      Alternatively, traditional methods like TF-IDF can be used for sparse
       embeddings.
      The search is then conducted based on term frequency or semantic similarity.


    Graph database:
      Constructs a knowledge base from extracted entity relationships within the text.
      This approach is precise but may require exact query matching, which could be
       restrictive in some applications.

    Regular SQL database:
      Offers structured data storage and retrieval but might lack the semantic flexibility
       of vector databases.
11
12
The process of RAG
13


1.   Vector Database Creation:
      RAG starts by converting an internal dataset into vectors and storing them in a
      vector database (or a database of your choosing).
2.   User Input:
      A user provides a query in natural language, seeking an answer or completion
3.   Information Retrieval: The retrieval mechanism scans the vector database to
     identify segments that are semantically similar to the user’s query (which is also
     embedded).
      These segments are then given to the LLM to enrich its context for generating
      responses.
4.   Combining Data: The chosen data segments from the database are combined
     with the user’s initial query, creating an expanded prompt.
5.   Generating Text: The enlarged prompt, filled with added context, is then given
     to the LLM, which crafts the final, context-aware response.
14
Difference Between RAG and Fine Tuning of the LLM:
15


1.   Retrieval systems (RAG) give LLM systems access to factual, access-
     controlled, timely information.
     Fine tuning can not do this, so there’s no competition.

2.   Fine tuning (not RAG) adapts the style, tone, and vocabulary of LLMs
     so that your linguistic “paint brush” matches the desired domain and style

3.   All in all, focus on RAG first. A successful LLM application must connect
     specialized data to the LLM workflow.
     Once you have a first full application working, you can add fine tuning to
     improve the style and vocabulary of the system.
     Fine tuning won’t save you if the RAG connection to data is built improperly.
16
17
we will go over these key areas.
18


    Ingestion
    Retrievel
    Synthesis
1. INGESTION
19
1. Chunking
20


    Chunking is the process of dividing the prompts and/or the documents
     to be retrieved, into smaller, manageable segments or chunks.
       These chunks can be defined either by a fixed size, such as a specific
        number of characters, sentences or paragraphs.

    In RAG, each chunk is encoded into an embedding vector for retrieval.
       Smaller, more precise chunks lead to a finer match between the user’s
        query and the content, enhancing the accuracy and relevance of the
        information retrieved.

    Larger chunks might include irrelevant information, introducing noise
     and potentially reducing the retrieval accuracy.
      By controlling the chunk size, RAG can maintain a balance between
       comprehensiveness and precision.
Chunk Size
21


    So, the next natural question that comes up is, how do you choose the right
     chunk size for your use case?

    The choice of chunk size in RAG is crucial.
    It needs to be small enough to ensure relevance and reduce noise but large
     enough to maintain the context’s integrity.
Let’s look at a few methods:
22


    Fixed-size chunking:
      Simply decide the number of tokens in our chunk along with whether there
        should be overlap between them or not.
      Overlap between chunks guarantees there to be minimal semantic context loss
        between chunks.
      This option is computationally cheap and simple to implement.
    Context-aware chunking:
      Content-aware chunking leverages the intrinsic structure of the text to create
        chunks that are more meaningful and contextually relevant.
    Naive Splitting:
      A basic method where sentences are split using periods and new lines.
    NLTK (Natural Language Toolkit):
      A comprehensive Python library for language processing.
      NLTK includes a sentence tokenizer that effectively splits text into sentences.
    spaCy:
      Advanced Python library for NLP tasks, it offers efficient sentence segmentation.
2. Embeddings
23


    Once you have your prompt chunked appropriately, the next step is to
     embed it.

    Embedding prompts and documents in RAG involves transforming both the
     user’s query (prompt) and the documents in the knowledge base into a
     format that can be effectively compared for relevance.

    This process is critical for RAG’s ability to retrieve the most relevant
     information from its knowledge base in response to a user query.
Benchmark for Embeddings
24


    One option to help pick which embedding model would be best suited for
     your task is to look at HuggingFace’s Massive Text Embedding Benchmark
     (MTEB) leaderboard.

          https://huggingface.co/spaces/mteb/leaderboard
whether a dense or sparse embedding can be used
25
3. Retrieval
26


    Let’s look at two different types of retrieval:
      Standard/Naive Approach

      Sentence-Window Retrieval



    Each of these approaches has specific strengths and weaknesses.
      Their suitability depends on the requirements of the RAG task, including
       the nature of the dataset, the complexity of the queries, and the desired
       balance between specificity and contextual understanding in the
       responses.
27
Advantages
28


    Simplicity and Efficiency:
      This method is straightforward and efficient, using the same text chunk
       for both embedding and synthesis, simplifying the retrieval process.

    Uniformity in Data Handling:
      It maintains consistency in the data used across both retrieval and
       synthesis phases.
Disadvantages
29


    Limited Contextual Understanding:
      LLMs may require a larger window for synthesis to generate better
       responses, which this approach may not adequately provide.

    Potential for Suboptimal Responses:
      Due to the limited context, the LLM might not have enough information to
       generate the most relevant and accurate responses.
Sentence-Window Retrieval / Small-to-Large Chunking
30


    The sentence-window approach breaks down documents into smaller units,
     such as sentences or small groups of sentences.

    It decouples the embeddings for retrieval tasks (which are smaller chunks
     stored in a Vector DB), but for synthesis it adds back in the context around
     the retrieved chunks
31
Sentences that are most relevant to the query
32


    During retrieval, we retrieve the sentences that are most relevant to the
     query via similarity search and replace the sentence with the full
     surrounding context
      using a static sentence-window around the context, implemented by
        retrieving sentences surrounding the one being originally retrieved
33
Advantages
34


    Enhanced Specificity in Retrieval:
      By breaking documents into smaller units, it enables more precise
       retrieval of segments directly relevant to a query.

    Context-Rich Synthesis:
      It reintroduces context around the retrieved chunks for synthesis,
       providing the LLM with a broader understanding to formulate responses.

    Balanced Approach:
      This method strikes a balance between focused retrieval and contextual
       richness, potentially improving response quality.
Disadvantages
35


    Increased Complexity:
       Managing separate processes for retrieval and synthesis adds
        complexity to the pipeline.

    Potential Contextual Gaps:
      There’s a risk of missing broader context if the surrounding information
       added back is not sufficiently comprehensive.
Retriever Ensembling and Reranking
36


    Thought:
      what if we could try a bunch of chunk sizes at once, and have a re-ranker
       prune the results?

    This achieves two purposes:
      Better (even though more costly) retrieved results by pooling results from
       multiple chunk sizes, assuming the re-ranker has a reasonable level of
       performance.
      A way to benchmark different retrieval strategies against each other
       (w.r.t. the re-ranker).
The process is as follows:
37


    Chunk up the same document in a bunch of different ways, say with chunk
     sizes: 128, 256, 512, and 1024.

    During retrieval, we fetch relevant chunks from each retriever, thus
     ensembling them together for retrieval.

    Use a re-ranker to rank/prune results.
38
Cont’d
39


     Based on evaluation results from LlamaIndex, faithfulness metrics go up
     slightly for the ensembled approach, indicating retrieved results are slightly
     more relevant.
    But pairwise comparisons lead to equal preference for both approaches,
     making it still questionable as to whether or not ensembling is better.
     https://docs.llamaindex.ai/en/stable/examples/retrievers/ensemble_retrieval

    Note that the ensembling strategy can be applied for other aspects of a
     RAG pipeline too, beyond chunk size, such as vector vs. keyword vs. hybrid
     search, etc.
Re-ranking
40


    Re-ranking in RAG refers to the process of evaluating and sorting the
     retrieved documents or information snippets based on their relevance to the
     given query or task.
There are different types of re-ranking techniques used in RAG
41


    Lexical Re-Ranking:
      This involves re-ranking based on lexical similarity between the query
       and the retrieved documents. Methods like BM25 or cosine similarity with
       TF-IDF vectors are common.
    Semantic Re-Ranking:
      This type of re-ranking uses semantic understanding to judge the
       relevance of documents. It often involves neural models like BERT or
       other transformer-based models to understand the context and meaning
       beyond mere word overlap.
    Learning-to-Rank (LTR) Methods:
      These involve training a model specifically for the task of ranking
       documents (point-wise, pair-wise, and list-wise) based on features
       extracted from both the query and the documents. This can include a mix
       of lexical, semantic, and other features.
Hybrid Methods:
42


    These combine lexical and semantic approaches, possibly with other signals
     like user feedback or domain-specific features, to improve re-ranking.


    Neural LTR methods are most commonly used at this stage since the candidate
     set is limited to dozens of samples.


    Some common neural models used for re-ranking are:
      Multi-Stage Document Ranking with BERT (monoBERT and duo BERT)

      Pretrained Transformers for Text Ranking BERT and Beyond

      ListT5

      ListBERT
43
Lost in the Middle: How Language Models Use Long Contexts
44

    While recent language models have the ability to take long contexts as input, relatively little
     is known about how well the language models use longer context.
    This paper by Liu et al. from Percy Liang’s lab at Stanford, UC Berkeley, and Samaya AI
     analyzes language model performance on two tasks that require identifying relevant
     information within their input contexts: multi-document question answering and key-value
     retrieval. Put simply, they analyze and evaluate how LLMs use the context by identifying
     relevant information within it.
    They tested open-source (MPT-30B-Instruct, LongChat-13B) and closed-source (OpenAI’s
     GPT-3.5-Turbo and Anthropic’s Claude 1.3) models. They used multi-document question-
     answering where the context included multiple retrieved documents and one correct
     answer, whose position was shuffled around. Key-value pair retrieval was carried out to
     analyze if longer contexts impact performance.
    They find that performance is often highest when relevant information occurs at the
     beginning or end of the input context, and significantly degrades when models must access
     relevant information in the middle of long contexts. In other words, their findings basically
     suggest that Retrieval-Augmentation (RAG) performance suffers when the relevant
     information to answer a query is presented in the middle of the context window with strong
     biases towards the beginning and the end of it.
A summary of their learnings is as follows:
45


    Best performance when the relevant information is at the beginning.
    Performance decreases with an increase in context length.
    Too many retrieved documents harm performance.
    Improving the retrieval and prompt creation step with a ranking stage could
     potentially boost performance by up to 20%.
    Extended-context models (GPT-3.5-Turbo vs. GPT-3.5-Turbo (16K)) are not
     better if the prompt fits the original context.
