Structured Output Converter
1


   The ability of LLMs to produce structured outputs is important for
    downstream applications that rely on reliably parsing output values.

   Developers want to quickly turn results from an AI model into data types,
    such as JSON, XML or Java classes, that can be passed to other
    application functions and methods.

   The Spring AI Structured Output Converters help to convert the LLM output
    into a structured format.
2
Structured Output API
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
it is up to the application to provide the tool calling logic
11


    Even though we typically refer to tool calling as a model capability, it is
     actually up to the client application to provide the tool calling logic.

    The model can only request a tool call and provide the input arguments,
     whereas the application is responsible for executing the tool call from the
     input arguments and returning the result.

    The model never gets access to any of the APIs provided as tools, which is
     a critical security consideration.

    Spring AI provides convenient APIs to define tools, resolve tool call requests
     from a model, and execute the tool calls.
12
13
14
Taking Actions
15


    AI models can be used to generate plans for accomplishing certain goals.
     For example, a model can generate a plan for booking a trip to Denmark.
    However, the model doesn’t have the ability to execute the plan.
    That’s where tools come in: they can be used to execute the plan that a
     model generates.

    In the previous example, we used a tool to determine the current date and
     time.
    In this example, we’ll define a second tool for setting an alarm at a specific
     time.
    The goal is to set an alarm for 10 minutes from now, so we need to provide
     both tools to the model to accomplish this task.
Cont’d
16


    We’ll add the new tool to the same DateTimeTools class as before.
    The new tool will take a single parameter, which is the time in ISO-8601
     format.
    The tool will then print a message to the console indicating that the alarm
     has been set for the given time.
    Like before, the tool is defined as a method annotated with @Tool, which
     we also use to provide a detailed description to help the model understand
     when and how to use the tool
17
18
19
20
21
Model Context Protocol (MCP)
22


    The Model Context Protocol (MCP) is a standardized protocol that enables
     AI models to interact with external tools and resources in a structured way.
    It supports multiple transport mechanisms to provide flexibility across
     different environments.
    The MCP Java SDK provides a Java implementation of the Model Context
     Protocol, enabling standardized interaction with AI models and tools through
     both synchronous and asynchronous communication patterns.
    Spring AI MCP extends the MCP Java SDK with Spring Boot integration,
     providing both client and server starters.
    Bootstrap your AI applications with MCP support using Spring Initializer.
MCP
23


    Modern web applications are increasingly integrating with Large Language
     Models (LLMs) to build solutions, which are not just limited to general
     knowledge-based question-answering.
    To enhance an AI model’s response and make it more context-aware, we
     can connect it to external sources like search engines, databases, and file
     systems.
    However, integrating and managing multiple data sources with different
     formats and protocols is a challenge.
    The Model Context Protocol (MCP), introduced by Anthropic, addresses this
     integration challenge and provides a standardized way to connect AI-
     powered applications with external data sources.
    Through MCP, we can build complex agents and workflows on top of a
     native LLM.
24
Communication between clients and servers
25


    Additionally, to handle communication between clients and servers, MCP
     provides two transport channels.

    To enable communication through standard input and output streams with
     local processes and command-line tools, it provides the Standard
     Input/Output (stdio) transport type.

    Alternatively, for HTTP-based communication between clients and servers,
     it provides the Server-Sent Events (SSE) transport type.
LAB TOPIC
26

    We’ll be building a chatbot using Anthropic’s Claude model, which will act
     as our MCP host.

    Alternatively, we can use a local LLM via Hugging Face or Ollama, as the
     specific AI model is irrelevant
27
Model Context Protocol (MCP) Client
28

    The MCP Client is a key component in the MCP architecture, responsible for
     establishing and managing connections with MCP servers.
    It implements the client-side of the protocol, handling:
       Protocol version negotiation to ensure compatibility with servers
       Capability negotiation to determine available features
       Message transport and JSON-RPC communication
       Tool discovery and execution
       Resource access and management
       Prompt system interactions
       Optional features:
           Roots management
           Sampling support
       Synchronous and asynchronous operations
       Transport options:
           Stdio-based transport for process-based communication
           Java HttpClient-based SSE client transport
           WebFlux SSE client transport for reactive HTTP streaming
29
MCP Server
30


    The MCP Server is a foundational component in the Model Context Protocol
     (MCP) architecture that provides tools, resources, and capabilities to clients.
    It implements the server-side of the protocol, responsible for:
       Server-side protocol operations implementation
           Tool exposure and discovery
           Resource management with URI-based access
           Prompt template provision and handling
           Capability negotiation with clients
           Structured logging and notifications
       Concurrent client connection management
       Synchronous and Asynchronous API support
       Transport implementations:
           Stdio-based transport for process-based communication
           Servlet-based SSE server transport
           WebFlux SSE server transport for reactive HTTP streaming
           WebMVC SSE server transport for servlet-based HTTP streaming
31
Multimodality API
32
Spring AI Multimodality
33


    Multimodality refers to a model’s ability to simultaneously understand and
     process information from various sources, including text, images, audio,
     and other data formats.

    The Spring AI Message API provides all necessary abstractions to support
     multimodal LLMs.
34
35
36
Chat models:
37


    Spring AI provides multimodal support for the following chat models:
      Anthropic Claude 3

      AWS Bedrock Converse

      Azure Open AI (e.g. GPT-4o models)

      Mistral AI (e.g. Mistral Pixtral models)

      Ollama (e.g. LLaVA, BakLLaVA, Llama3.2 models)

      OpenAI (e.g. GPT-4 and GPT-4o models)

      Vertex AI Gemini (e.g. gemini-1.5-pro-001, gemini-1.5-flash-001 models)
Observability
38


    Spring AI builds upon the observability features in the Spring ecosystem to
     provide insights into AI-related operations.

    Spring AI provides metrics and tracing capabilities for its core components:
      ChatClient (including Advisor)

      ChatModel

      EmbeddingModel

      ImageModel

      VectorStore.
Prompts
39


    Prompts are the inputs that guide an AI model to generate specific outputs.
     The design and phrasing of these prompts significantly influence the
     model’s responses.
    The structure of prompts has evolved over time within the AI field.
    Initially, prompts were simple strings.
    Over time, they grew to include placeholders for specific inputs, like
     "USER:", which the AI model recognizes.
    OpenAI have introduced even more structure to prompts by categorizing
     multiple message strings into distinct roles before they are processed by the
     AI model.
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
OpenAI Tokenizer UI
54


    Experiment with the OpenAI Tokenizer UI to see how words are converted
     into tokens.
            https://platform.openai.com/tokenizer
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
